

This information is intended for use by health professionals

1. Name of the medicinal product
Aceclofenac 100 mg film-coated Tablets
2. Qualitative and quantitative composition
Each film-coated tablet contains 100 mg of Aceclofenac. 
For a full list of excipients, see section 6.1.
3. Pharmaceutical form
100 mg: Film-coated tablet
White to off-white, round shaped, biconvex, film-coated tablet debossed with “100” on one side and plain on the other side.
4. Clinical particulars
4.1 Therapeutic indications
Aceclofenac film-coated tablets are indicated for the relief of pain and inflammation in osteoarthritis, rheumatoid arthritis and ankylosing spondylitis.
4.2 Posology and method of administration
Aceclofenac film-coated tablets are supplied for oral administration and should be swallowed whole with a sufficient quantity of liquid.
To be taken preferably with or after food. When Aceclofenac was administered to fasting and fed healthy volunteers only the rate and not the extent of aceclofenac absorption was affected.
Undesirable effects may be minimized by using the lowest effective dose for the shortest duration necessary to control symptoms (see section 4.4 Special warnings and precautions for use).

Adults 

The recommended dose is 200 mg daily, taken as two separate 100 mg doses, one tablet in the morning and one in the evening.


Paediatric population


There are no clinical data on the use of Aceclofenac in children and therefore it is not recommended for use in children under 18 years of age.

Elderly 

The elderly, who are more likely to be suffering from impaired renal, cardiovascular or hepatic function and receiving concomitant medication, are at increased risk of serious consequences of adverse reactions. If an NSAID is considered necessary, the lowest effective dose should be used and for the shortest possible duration. The patient should be monitored regularly for GI bleeding during NSAID therapy.
The pharmacokinetics of Aceclofenac are not altered in elderly patients, therefore it is not considered necessary to modify the dose or dose frequency. 

Renal insufficiency

There is no evidence that the dosage of Aceclofenac needs to be modified in patients with mild renal impairment, but as with other NSAIDs caution should be exercised (see Section 4.4). 

Hepatic insufficiency

There is some evidence that the dose of Aceclofenac should be reduced in patients with hepatic impairment and it is suggested that an initial daily dose of 100 mg be used. 

Method of administration

Swallow the tablet whole with a glass of water. Do not crush or chew the tablets. Never change the dose of your medicine without talking to your doctor first. Continue to take your tablets for as long as your doctor recommends. 
4.3 Contraindications
Hypersensitivity to Aceclofenac or to any of the excipients listed in section 6.1
Active, or history of recurrent peptic ulcer/haemorrhage (two or more distinct episodes of proven ulceration or bleeding).
NSAIDS are contraindicated in patients who have previously shown hypersensitivity reactions (eg. Asthma, rhinitis, angioedema or urticaria) in response to ibuprofen, aspirin, or other non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs.
Hepatic failure and renal failure (see section 4.4). 
Patients with established congestive heart failure (NYHA II-IV), ischaemic heart disease, peripheral arterial disease and/or cerebrovascular disease.
History of gastrointestinal bleeding or perforation, related to previous NSAIDS therapy.
Active bleedings or bleeding disorders.
Aceclofenac should not be prescribed during pregnancy, especially during the last trimester of pregnancy, unless there are compelling reasons for doing so. The lowest effective dosage should be used (see section 4.6).
4.4 Special warnings and precautions for use
Undesirable effects may be minimised by using the lowest effective dose for the shortest duration necessary to control symptoms (see section 4.2, and GI and cardiovascular risks below). 
The use of Aceclofenac with concomitant NSAIDs including cyclooxygenase- 2 selective inhibitors should be avoided (see section 4.5). 

Elderly:

The elderly have an increased frequency of adverse reactions to NSAIDs especially gastrointestinal bleeding and perforation which may be fatal (see section 4.2). 

Respiratory disorders:

Caution is required if administered to patients suffering from, or with a previous history of, bronchial asthma since NSAIDs have been reported to precipitate bronchospasm in such patients. 

Cardiovascular, Renal and Hepatic Impairment:

The administration of an NSAID may cause a dose dependent reduction in prostaglandin formation and precipitate renal failure. Patients at greatest risk of this reaction are those with impaired renal function, cardiac impairment, liver dysfunction, those taking diuretics or recovering from major surgery,  and the elderly. The importance of prostaglandins in maintaining renal blood flow should be taken into account in these patients.
 Renal function should be monitored in these patients (see also section 4.3). 

Renal:

Patients with mild to moderate renal impairment should be kept under surveillance, since the use of NSAIDs may result in deterioration of renal function. The lowest effective dose should be used and renal function monitored regularly. Effects on renal function are usually reversible on withdrawal of Aceclofenac.  

Hepatic:

If abnormal liver function tests persist or worsen, clinical signs or symptoms consistent with liver disease develop or if other manifestations occur (eosinophilia, rash), Aceclofenac Tablets should be discontinued. Close medical surveillance is necessary in patients suffering from mild to moderate impairment of hepatic function. Hepatitis may occur without prodromal symptoms. 
Use of Aceclofenac  in patients with hepatic porphyria may trigger an attack. 

Cardiovascular and cerebrovascular effects:

Appropriate monitoring and advice are required for patients with a history of hypertension and/or mild to moderate congestive heart failure as fluid retention and oedema have been reported in association with NSAID therapy. Patients with congestive heart failure ( NYHA-I) and patients with significant risk factors for cardiovascular events (e.g. hypertension, hyperlipidaemia, diabetes mellitus, smoking) should only be treated with aceclofenac after careful consideration. As the cardiovascular risks of aceclofenac may increase with dose and duration of exposure, the shortest duration possible and the lowest effective daily dose should be used. The patient's need for symptomatic relief and response to therapy should be re- evaluated periodically.
Aceclofenac should also be administered with caution and under close medical surveillance to patients with a history of cerebrovascular bleeding. 

Gastrointestinal bleeding, ulceration and perforation:

GI bleeding, ulceration or perforation, which can be fatal, has been reported with all NSAIDs at any time during treatment, with or without warning symptoms or a previous history of serious GI events. 
Close medical surveillance is imperative in patients with symptoms indicative of gastro-intestinal disorders involving either the upper or lower gastrointestinal tract, with a history suggestive of gastro-intestinal ulceration, bleeding or perforation, with ulcerative colitis or with Crohn's disease, or haematological abnormalities, as these conditions may be exacerbated (see section 4.8)
The risk of GI bleeding, ulceration or perforation is higher with increasing NSAID doses, in patients with a history of ulcer, particularly if complicated with haemorrhage or perforation (see section 4.3), and in the elderly. These patients should commence treatment on the lowest dose available. Combination therapy with protective agents (e.g. misoprostol or proton pump inhibitors) should be considered for these patients, and also for patients requiring concomitant low dose aspirin, or other drugs likely to increase gastrointestinal risk (see below and section 4.5). 
Patients with a history of GI toxicity, particularly when elderly, should report any unusual abdominal symptoms (especially GI bleeding) particularly in the initial stages of treatment. 
Caution should be advised in patients receiving concomitant medications which could increase the risk of ulceration or bleeding, such as systemic corticosteroids, anticoagulants such as warfarin, selective serotonin-reuptake inhibitors or antiplatelet agents such as aspirin (see section 4.5). 
When GI bleeding or ulceration occurs in patients receiving aceclofenac, the treatment should be withdrawn. 

SLE and mixed connective tissue disease:

In patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) and mixed connective tissue disorders there may be an increased risk of aseptic meningitis (see section 4.8). 

Dermatological:

Serious skin reactions, some of them fatal, including exfoliative dermatitis, Stevens-Johnson syndrome, and toxic epidermal necrolysis, have been reported very rarely in association with the use of NSAIDs (see section 4.8). Patients appear to be at highest risk for these reactions early in the course of therapy, the onset of the reaction occurring in the majority of cases within the first month of treatment. Aceclofenac should be discontinued at the first appearance of skin rash, mucosal lesions, or any other sign of hypersensitivity. 
Exceptionally, varicella can trigger serious cutaneous and soft tissues infections complications. To date, the contributing role of NSAIDs in the worsening of these infections cannot be ruled out. Thus, it is advisable to avoid use of Aceclofenac in case of varicella. 
Hypersensitivity  reactions:
As with other NSAIDs, allergic reactions, including anaphylactic/anaphylactoid reactions, can also occur without earlier exposure to the drug. 

Haematological:

Aceclofenac Tablets may reversibly inhibit platelet aggregation (see section 4.5 anticoagulants under 'Interactions'). 

Long-term treatment:

All patients who are receiving NSAIDs should be monitored as a precautionary measure e.g. renal, hepatic function (elevation of liver enzymes may occur) and blood counts. 
4.5 Interaction with other medicinal products and other forms of interaction

Other analgesics including cyclooxygenase-2 selective inhibitors: Avoid concomitant use of two or more NSAIDs (including aspirin) as this may increase the risk of adverse effects including GI bleeding  (see section 4.4). 

Anti-hypertensives: NSAIDs, may reduce the  effect of activity antihypertensives. The risk of acute renal insufficiency  which is usually reversible, may be increased in some patients with compromised renal function (e.g. dehydrated patients or elderly patients) when ACE- inhibitors or angiotensin II receptor antagonists are combined with NSAIDs. Therefore, the combination should be administered with caution, especially in the elderly. Patients should be adequately hydrated and consideration should be given to monitoring of renal function after initiation of concomitant therapy,and periodically thereafter.  

Diuretics: Aceclofenac, like other NSAIDs, may inhibit the activity of diuretics. Diuretics can increase the risk of nephrotoxicity of NSAIDs. Although it was not shown to affect blood pressure control when co-administered with bendrofluazide, interactions with other diuretics cannot be ruled out. When concomitant administration with potassium-sparing diuretics is employed, serum potassium should be monitored. 

Cardiac glycosides like digoxin : NSAIDs may exacerbate cardiac failure, reduce GFR (glomerular filtration rate) and inhibit the renal clearance of glycosides, resulting in increased plasma glycoside levels. The combination should be avoided unless frequent monitoring of glycoside levels can be performed.

Lithium: Several NSAID drugs inhibit the renal clearance of lithium, resulting in increased serum concentrations of lithium. The combination should be avoided unless frequent monitoring of lithium can be performed. 

Methotrexate: The possible interaction between NSAIDs and methotrexate should be born in mind also when low doses of methotrexate are used, especially in patients with decreased renal function. When combination therapy has to be used, the renal function should be monitored. Caution should be exercised if both an NSAID  and methotrexate are administered within 24 hours of each other, since NSAIDs may increase plasma levels, resulting in increased toxicity.

Mifepristone: NSAIDs should not be used for 8-12 days after mifepristone administration as NSAIDs can reduce the effect of mifepristone. 

Corticosteroids: Increased risk of gastrointestinal ulceration or bleeding (see section 4.4). 

Anti-coagulants: NSAIDs may enhance the effects of anti-coagulants, such as warfarin (see section 4.4). Close monitoring of patients on combined anti-coagulants and Aceclofenac Tablets therapy should be undertaken. 

Quinolone antibiotics: Animal data indicate that NSAIDs can increase the risk of convulsions associated with quinolone antibiotics. Patients taking NSAIDs and quinolones may have an increased risk of developing convulsions. 

Anti-platelet agents and selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs): Increased risk of gastrointestinal bleeding (see section 4.4). 

Ciclosporin, Tacrolimus: Administration of NSAID drugs together with ciclosporin or tacrolimus is thought to increase the risk of nephrotoxicity due to decreased synthesis of prostacyclin in the kidney. During combination therapy it is therefore important to carefully monitor renal function. 

Zidovudine: Increased risk of haematological toxicity when NSAIDs are given with zidovudine. There  are indications of an increased risk of haemarthroses and haematoma in HIV(+) haemophiliacs receiving concurrent treatment with zidovudine and ibuprofen. 

Antidiabetic agents: Clinical studies have shown that diclofenac can be given together with oral antidiabetic agents with influencing their clinical effect. However, there have been isolated reports of hypoglycaemic and hyperglycaemic effects. Thus with Aceclofenac Tablets, consideration should be given to adjustment of the dosage of hypoglycaemic agents. 
4.6 Fertility,pregnancy and lactation

Pregnancy:

There is no information on the use of Aceclofenac during pregnancy. Inhibition of prostaglandin synthesis may adversely affect the pregnancy and/or the embryo/fetal development. Data from epidemiological studies suggest an increased risk of miscarriage, cardiac malformation or gastroschisis after use of prostaglandin synthesis inhibitor in early pregnancy. The absolute risk for cardiovascular malformation was increased from less than 1%, up to approximately 1.5%. The risk is believed to increase with dose and duration of therapy. 
In animals, administration of a prostaglandin synthesis inhibitor has been shown to result in increased pre- and post-implantation loss and embryo-foetal lethality. In addition, increased incidences of various malformations, including cardiovascular, have been reported in animals given a prostaglandin synthesis inhibitor during the organogenetic period. During the first and second trimester of pregnancy, Aceclofenac should not be given unless clearly necessary. If Aceclofenac is used by a women attempting to conceive, or during the first and second trimester of pregnancy, the dose should be kept as low and duration of treatment as short as possible.
During the third trimester of pregnancy, all prostaglandin synthesis inhibitors may expose the foetus to: 
- Cardiopulmonary toxicity (with premature closure of the ductus arteriosus and pulmonary hypertension); 
- renal dysfunction, which may progress to renal failure with oligo-hydroamniosis; 
the mother and the neonate, at the end of pregnancy, to: 
- Possible prolongation of bleeding time, an anti-aggregating effect which may occur even at very low doses. 
- Inhibition  of uterine contractions resulting in delayed or prolonged labour .
Consequently, aceclofenac is contraindicated during the third trimester of pregnancy (see section 4.3)

Lactation:

There is no information on the secretion of Aceclofenac to breast milk, there was however no notable transfer of radio labelled (14C) Aceclofenac to the milk of lactating rats. 
The use of Aceclofenac Tablets should therefore be avoided in pregnancy and lactation unless the potential benefits to the other outweigh the possible risks to the foetus. 
Fertility; 
The use of Aceclofenac  tablets  may impair female fertility and is not recommended in women  attempting  to conceive. In women who have difficulties conceiving or who are undergoing investigation of infertility withdrawal of Aceclofenac tablets should be considered . 
4.7 Effects on ability to drive and use machines
Undesirable effects such as dizziness, vertigo, drowsiness, fatigue, visual disturbances or other central nervous system disorders  are possible after taking NSAIDs. If affected, patients should not drive or operate machinery. 
4.8 Undesirable effects

Gastrointestinal: 

The most commonly-observed adverse events are gastrointestinal in nature. Peptic ulcers, perforation or GI bleeding, sometimes fatal, particularly in the elderly, may occur (see section 4.4). Nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea, flatulence, constipation, dyspepsia, abdominal pain, melaena, haematemesis, ulcerative stomatitis, exacerbation of colitis and Crohn's disease (See section 4.4) have been reported following administration. Less frequently, gastritis has been observed. Pancreatitis has been reported very rarely.

Hypersensitivity: 

Hypersensitivity reactions have been reported following treatment with NSAIDs. These may consist of (a) non-specific allergic reactions and anaphylaxis (b) respiratory tract reactivity comprising asthma, aggravated asthma, bronchospasm or dyspnoea, or (c) assorted skin disorders, including rashes of various types, pruritus, urticaria, purpura, angiodema and, more rarely exfoliative and bullous dermatoses (including epidermal necrolysis and erythema multiforme).

Cardiovascular and cerebrovascular:

Oedema, hypertension and cardiac failure have been reported in association with NSAID treatment.
Aceclofenac is both structurally related and metabolised to diclofenac for which a greater amount of clinical trial and epidemiological data consistently point towards an increased risk of general arterial thrombotic events (for example myocardial infarction or stroke , particularly at high doses or in long treatment). Epidemiological data has also found an increased risk of acute coronary syndrome and myocardial infarction associated with the use of aceclofenac (see section 4.3 and 4.4 for Contraindications and Special warnings and special precautions for use).
Exceptionally, occurrence of serious cutaneous and soft tissues infections complications during varicella has been reported in association with NSAID treatment
Other adverse reactions reported less commonly include:

Renal: 

interstitial nephritis

Neurological and special senses:

optic neuritis, reports of aseptic meningitis (especially in patients with existing auto-immune disorders, such as systemic lupus erythematosus, mixed connective tissue disease), with symptoms such as stiff neck, headache, nausea, vomiting, fever or disorientation (See section 4.4) , confusion, hallucinations, malaise, and drowsiness.

Haematological: 

agranulocytosis, aplastic anaemia 

Dermatological:

Bullous reactions including Stevens Johnson Syndrome and Toxic Epidermal Necrolysis (very rare). Photosensitivity.
If serious adverse reactions occur, Aceclofenac tablets  should be withdrawn.
The following is a table of adverse reactions reported during clinical studies and after authorisation, grouped by System OrganClass and estimated frequencies. Very common (≥1/10); common (≥1/100 to <1/10); uncommon (≥1/1,000 to<1/100), rare (≥1/10,000 to <1/1,000), very rare (<1/10,000).


MedDRa SOC



Common 


1/100 to <1/10



Uncommon 



							≥1/1,000 to <1/100



Rare 



							≥1/10,000 to <1/1,000



Very rare <1/10,000


Blood and lymphatic system disorders

 

 

Anaemia

Bone Marrow depression, Granulocytopenia
Thrombocytopenia
Neutropenia
Haemolytic anaemia

Immune system disorders

 

 

Anaphylactic reaction (including shock)
Hypersensitivity

 

Metabolism and nutrition disorders

 

 

 

Hyperkalemia

Psychiatric disorders

 

 

 

Depression
Abnormal dreams
Insomnia

Nervous system disorders

Dizziness

 

 

Paraesthesia
Tremor
Somnolence
Headache
Dysgeusia (abnormal taste)

Eye disorders

 



Visual disturbance 

 

Ear and labyrinth disorders

 

 

 

Vertigo
Tinnitus

Cardiac disorders

 

 

 Cardiac failure

Palpitations

Vascular disorders

 

 

 Hypertension

Flushing
Hot flush
vasculitis

Respiratory, thoracic and mediastinal disorders

 

 

Dyspnoea

Bronchospasm
Stridor

Gastrointestinal disorders

Dyspepsia
Abdominal pain
Nausea
Diarrhoea

Flatulence
Gastritis
Constipation
Vomiting
Mouth ulceration

Melaena
Gastrointestinal haemorrhage
Gastrointestinal ulceration

Stomatitis 
Intestinal perforation
Exacerbation of Crohn's disease and colitis Ulcerative
Haematemesis
Pancreatitis

Hepatobiliary disorders

 Hepatic enzyme increased

 

 

Hepatic injury
(including hepatitis )
Jaundice
Blood alkaline phosphatase increased

Skin and subcutaneous tissue disorders

 

Pruritus
Rash
Dermatitis
Urticaria

Angioedema

Purpura
Severe mucocutaneous skin reaction (including Stevens Johnson Syndrome and Toxic Epidermal Necrolysis)

Renal and urinary disorders

 

 Blood urea increased
Blood creatinine increased

 

Renal failure 
Nephrotic syndrome

General disorders and administration site conditions

 

 

 

Oedema
Fatigue
Cramps in legs

Investigations





 

Weight increase

Reporting of suspected adverse reactions 
Reporting suspected adverse reactions after authorisation of the medicinal product is important. It allows continued monitoring of the benefit/risk balance of the medicinal product. Healthcare professionals are asked to report any suspected adverse reactions via the Yellow Card Scheme at: www.mhra.gov.uk/yellowcard or search for MHRA Yellow Card in the Google Play or Apple App Store.
4.9 Overdose

a) Symptoms 

Symptoms include headache, nausea, vomiting, epigastric pain, gastrointestinal irritation, gastrointestinal bleeding, rarely diarrhoea, disorientation, excitation, coma, drowsiness, dizziness, tinnitus, hypotension, respiratory depression, fainting, occasionally convulsions. In cases of significant poisoning acute renal failure and liver damage are possible. 

b) Therapeutic measure :
Patients should be treated symptomatically as required. Within one hour of ingestion of a potentially toxic amount, activated charcoal should be considered. Alternatively, in adults, gastric lavage should be considered within one hour of ingestion of a potentially life-threatening overdose. 
Specific therapies such as, dialysis or haemoperfusion are probable of no help in eliminating NSAIDs due to their high rate of protein binding and extensive metabolism. Good urine output should be ensured. 
Renal and liver function should be closely monitored. Patients should be observed for at least four hours after ingestion of potentially toxic amounts.  In case of frequent or prolonged convulsions, patients should be treated with intravenous diazepam. Other measures may be indicated by the patient's clinical condition. 
Management of acute poisoning with oral aceclofenac  essentially consists of supportive and symptomatic measuresfor complications such as hypotension, renal failure, convulsions, gastro-intestinal irritation, and respiratory depression.
5. Pharmacological properties
5.1 Pharmacodynamic properties
Aceclofenac is a non-steroidal agent with marked anti-inflammatory and analgesic properties. 
ATC code: M01A B16
The mode of action of aceclofenac is largely based on the inhibition to prostaglandin synthesis. Aceclofenac is a potent inhibitor of the enzyme cyclo-oxygenase, which is involved in the production of prostaglandins. 
5.2 Pharmacokinetic properties
After oral administration, aceclofenac is rapidly and completely absorbed as unchanged drug. Peak plasma concentrations are reached approximately 1.25 to 3.00 hours following ingestion. Aceclofenac penetrates into the synovial fluid, where the concentrations reach approximately 57% of those in plasma. The volume of distribution is approximately 25 L. 
The mean plasma elimination half-life is around 4 hours. Aceclofenac is highly protein- bound (>99%). Aceclofenac circulates mainly as unchanged drug. 4'- hydroxyaceclofenac is the main metabolite detected in plasma. Approximately two- thirds of the administered dose is excreted via the urine, mainly as hydroxymetabolites. 
No changes in the pharmacokinetics of aceclofenac have been detected in the elderly. 
5.3 Preclinical safety data
The results from preclinical studies conducted with aceclofenac are consistent with those expected for NSAIDs. The principal target organ was the gastro-intestinal tract. 
No unexpected findings were recorded. 
Aceclofenac was not considered to have any mutagenic activity in three in vitro studies and an in vivo study in the mouse. 
Aceclofenac was not found to be carcinogenic in either the mouse or rat.
Animal studies indicate that there was no evidence of teratogenesis in rats although the systemic exposure was low and in rabbits, treatment with aceclofenac (10 mg/kg/day) resulted in a series of morphological changes in some fetuses.
6. Pharmaceutical particulars
6.1 List of excipients

Core Tablet:

Cellulose microcrystalline 
Croscarmellose sodium
Povidone K-30 
Glyceryl palmitostearate 

Tablet coating:

Hypromellose 15 cps
Macrogol 400 
Titanium dioxide (E171).
6.2 Incompatibilities
Not applicable
6.3 Shelf life
4 years. 
6.4 Special precautions for storage

			“Store below 25°C”. 
6.5 Nature and contents of container
Aceclofenac Tablets 100 mg are packed in aluminium -aluminium blister packs.
The aluminium blister foil is soft temper, plain, one side bright, dull side lacquer laminated to 25 μm OPA, bright side lacquer laminated to 60 μm PVC.
The aluminium foil is 0.025 mm thick aluminium alloy hard temper foil with mat finish.
The blisters are further pack in to carton along with leaflet in pack sizes of 10, 20, 30, 40, 60 and 100 tablets per pack.
Not all pack sizes may be marketed.
6.6 Special precautions for disposal and other handling
Any unused product or waste material should be disposed of in accordance with local requirements.
7. Marketing authorisation holder
Accord Healthcare Limited
Sage House
319, Pinner Road
North Harrow
Middlesex HA1 4 HF
United Kingdom
8. Marketing authorisation number(s)
PL 20075/0350
9. Date of first authorisation/renewal of the authorisation
14/09/2011
10. Date of revision of the text
05/03/2019

